The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Travels of Marco Polo Volume 1
by Marco Polo and Rustichello of Pisa

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Travels of Marco Polo Volume 1

Author: Marco Polo and Rustichello of Pisa

Release Date: January 8, 2004 [EBook #10636]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO VOLUME 1 ***




Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Connal, John Williams and PG
Distributed Proofreaders





THE TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO

THE COMPLETE YULE-CORDIER EDITION


[Illustration: H. Yule]

Including the unabridged third edition (1903) of Henry Yule's annotated
translation, as revised by Henri Cordier; together with Cordier's later
volume of notes and addenda (1920)

IN TWO VOLUMES

VOLUME I

_Containing the first volume of the 1903 edition_




                         DEDICATION.


                      TO THE MEMORY OF
SIR RODERICK I. MURCHISON, BART., K.C.B., G.C.ST.A., G.C.ST.S.,
                            ETC.
                    THE PERFECT FRIEND
    WHO FIRST BROUGHT HENRY YULE AND JOHN MURRAY TOGETHER
         (HE ENTERED INTO REST, OCTOBER 22ND, 1871,)
            AND TO THAT OF HIS MUCH LOVED NIECE,
                 HARRIET ISABELLA MURCHISON,
        WIFE OF KENNETH ROBERT MURCHISON, D.L., J.P.,
         (SHE ENTERED INTO REST, AUGUST 9TH, 1902,)
     UNDER WHOSE EVER HOSPITABLE ROOF MANY OF THE PROOF
           SHEETS OF THIS EDITION WERE READ BY ME,
                I DEDICATE THESE VOLUMES FROM
                   THE OLD MURCHISON HOME,
           IN THANKFUL REMEMBRANCE OF ALL I OWE TO
    THE ABIDING AFFECTION, SYMPATHY, AND EXAMPLE OF BOTH.

TARADALE,                               AMY FRANCES YULE.
ROSS-SHIRE,                             SEPTEMBER 11TH, 1902.
SCOTLAND.


       *     *     *     *
      Ed è da noi sì strano,
    Che quando ne ragiono
      I' non trovo nessuno,
    Che l'abbia navicato,
       *     *     *     *
    Le parti del Levante,
      Là dove sono tante
    Gemme di gran valute
      E di molta salute:
    E sono in quello giro
      Balsamo, e ambra, e tiro,
    E lo pepe, e lo legno
      Aloe, ch' è sì degno,
    E spigo, e cardamomo,
      Giengiovo, e cennamomo;
    E altre molte spezie,
      Ciascuna in sua spezie,
    E migliore, e più fina,
      E sana in medicina.
    Appresso in questo loco
      Mise in assetto loco
    Li tigri, e li grifoni,
      Leofanti, e leoni
    Cammelli, e dragomene,
      Badalischi, e gene,
    E pantere, e castoro,
      Le formiche dell' oro,
    E tanti altri animali,
      Ch' io non so ben dir quail,
    Che son sì divisati,
      E sì dissomigliati
    Di corpo e di fazione,
      Di sì fera ragione,
    E di sì strana taglia,
      Ch'io non credo san faglia,
    Ch' alcun uomo vivente
      Potesse veramente
    Per lingua, o per scritture
      Recitar le figure
    Delle bestie, e gli uccelli....

        --From _Il Tesoretto di Ser Brunetto Latini_ (circa MDCCLX.).
          (_Florence_, 1824, pp. 83 seqq.)


[Illustration]

    [Greek:
    Ándra moi hénnepe, Mousa, polýtropon, hòs mála pollà
    Plágchthae   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
    Pollon d' anthrópon íden ástea kaì nóon égno].

                                              _Odyssey_, I.


         --"I AM BECOME A NAME;
    FOR ALWAYS ROAMING WITH A HUNGRY HEART
    MUCH HAVE I SEEN AND KNOWN; CITIES OF MEN,
    AND MANNERS, CLIMATES, COUNCILS, GOVERNMENTS,
    MYSELF NOT LEAST, BUT HONOURED OF THEM ALL."

                                                  TENNYSON.


    "A SEDER CI PONEMMO IVI AMBODUI
      VÔLTI A LEVANTE, OND' ERAVAM SALITI;
      CHÈ SUOLE A RIGUARDAR GIOVARE ALTRUI."

                                    DANTE, _Purgatory_, IV.


[Illustration: Messer Marco Polo, with Messer Nicolo and Messer Maffeo,
returned from xxvi years' sojourn in the Orient, is denied entrance to the
Ca' Polo. (See _Int._ p. 4)]




CONTENTS OF VOL. I.


DEDICATION

NOTE BY MISS YULE

PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION

ORIGINAL PREFACE

ORIGINAL DEDICATION

MEMOIR OF SIR HENRY YULE BY AMY FRANCES YULE, L.A.SOC. ANT. SCOT.

A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SIR HENRY YULE'S WRITINGS

SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS

EXPLANATORY LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. I.

INTRODUCTORY NOTICES

THE BOOK OF MARCO POLO.




NOTE BY MISS YULE


I desire to take this opportunity of recording my grateful sense of the
unsparing labour, learning, and devotion, with which my father's valued
friend, Professor Henri Cordier, has performed the difficult and delicate
task which I entrusted to his loyal friendship.

Apart from Professor Cordier's very special qualifications for the work,
I feel sure that no other Editor could have been more entirely acceptable
to my father. I can give him no higher praise than to say that he has
laboured in Yule's own spirit.

The slight Memoir which I have contributed (for which I accept all
responsibility), attempts no more than a rough sketch of my father's
character and career, but it will, I hope, serve to recall pleasantly his
remarkable individuality to the few remaining who knew him in his prime,
whilst it may also afford some idea of the man, and his work and
environment, to those who had not that advantage.

No one can be more conscious than myself of its many shortcomings, which I
will not attempt to excuse. I can, however, honestly say that these have
not been due to negligence, but are rather the blemishes almost inseparable
from the fulfilment under the gloom of bereavement and amidst the pressure
of other duties, of a task undertaken in more favourable circumstances.

Nevertheless, in spite of all defects, I believe this sketch to be such
a record as my father would himself have approved, and I know also that he
would have chosen my hand to write it.

In conclusion, I may note that the first edition of this work was
dedicated to that very noble lady, the Queen (then Crown Princess)
Margherita of Italy. In the second edition the Dedication was reproduced
within brackets (as also the original preface), but not renewed. That
precedent is again followed.

I have, therefore, felt at liberty to associate the present edition of my
father's work with the Name MURCHISON, which for more than a generation
was the name most generally representative of British Science in Foreign
Lands, as of Foreign Science in Britain.

A. F. YULE.




PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION


Little did I think, some thirty years ago, when I received a copy of the
first edition of this grand work, that I should be one day entrusted with
the difficult but glorious task of supervising the third edition. When the
first edition of the _Book of Ser Marco Polo_ reached "Far Cathay," it
created quite a stir in the small circle of the learned foreigners, who
then resided there, and became a starting-point for many researches, of
which the results have been made use of partly in the second edition, and
partly in the present. The Archimandrite PALLADIUS and Dr. E.
BRETSCHNEIDER, at Peking, ALEX. WYLIE, at Shang-hai--friends of mine who
have, alas! passed away, with the exception of the Right Rev. Bishop G. E.
MOULE, of Hang-chau, the only survivor of this little group of
hard-working scholars,--were the first to explore the Chinese sources of
information which were to yield a rich harvest into their hands.

When I returned home from China in 1876, I was introduced to Colonel HENRY
YULE, at the India Office, by our common friend, Dr. REINHOLD ROST, and
from that time we met frequently and kept up a correspondence which
terminated only with the life of the great geographer, whose friend I had
become. A new edition of the travels of Friar Odoric of Pordenone, our
"mutual friend," in which Yule had taken the greatest interest, was
dedicated by me to his memory. I knew that Yule contemplated a third
edition of his _Marco Polo_, and all will regret that time was not allowed
to him to complete this labour of love, to see it published. If the duty
of bringing out the new edition of _Marco Polo_ has fallen on one who
considers himself but an unworthy successor of the first illustrious
commentator, it is fair to add that the work could not have been entrusted
to a more respectful disciple. Many of our tastes were similar; we had the
same desire to seek the truth, the same earnest wish to be exact, perhaps
the same sense of humour, and, what is necessary when writing on Marco
Polo, certainly the same love for Venice and its history. Not only am I,
with the late CHARLES SCHEFER, the founder and the editor of the _Recueil
de Voyages et de Documents pour servir à l'Histoire de la Géographie
depuis le XIII'e jusqu'à la fin du XVI'e siècle_, but I am also the
successor, at the Ecole des langues Orientales Vivantes, of G. PAUTHIER,
whose book on the Venetian Traveller is still valuable, so the mantle of
the last two editors fell upon my shoulders.

I therefore, gladly and thankfully, accepted Miss AMY FRANCIS YULE'S kind
proposal to undertake the editorship of the third edition of the _Book of
Ser Marco Polo_, and I wish to express here my gratitude to her for the
great honour she has thus done me.[1]

Unfortunately for his successor, Sir Henry Yule, evidently trusting to his
own good memory, left but few notes. These are contained in an interleaved
copy obligingly placed at my disposal by Miss Yule, but I luckily found
assistance from various other quarters. The following works have proved of
the greatest assistance to me:--The articles of General HOUTUM-SCHINDLER
in the _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_, and the excellent books of
Lord CURZON and of Major P. MOLESWORTH SYKES on Persia, M. GRENARD'S
account of DUTREUIL DE RHINS' Mission to Central Asia, BRETSCHNEIDER'S and
PALLADIUS' remarkable papers on Mediaeval Travellers and Geography, and
above all, the valuable books of the Hon. W. W. ROCKHILL on Tibet and
Rubruck, to which the distinguished diplomatist, traveller, and scholar
kindly added a list of notes of the greatest importance to me, for which I
offer him my hearty thanks.

My thanks are also due to H.H. Prince ROLAND BONAPARTE, who kindly gave me
permission to reproduce some of the plates of his _Recueil de Documents de
l'Epoque Mongole_, to M. LÉOPOLD DELISLE, the learned Principal Librarian
of the Bibliothèque Nationale, who gave me the opportunity to study the
inventory made after the death of the Doge Marino Faliero, to the Count de
SEMALLÉ, formerly French Chargé d'Affaires at Peking, who gave me for
reproduction a number of photographs from his valuable personal
collection, and last, not least, my old friend Comm. NICOLÒ BAROZZI, who
continued to lend me the assistance which he had formerly rendered to Sir
Henry Yule at Venice.

Since the last edition was published, more than twenty-five years ago,
Persia has been more thoroughly studied; new routes have been explored in
Central Asia, Karakorum has been fully described, and Western and
South-Western China have been opened up to our knowledge in many
directions. The results of these investigations form the main features of
this new edition of _Marco Polo_. I have suppressed hardly any of Sir Henry
Yule's notes and altered but few, doing so only when the light of recent
information has proved him to be in error, but I have supplemented them by
what, I hope, will be found useful, new information.[2]

Before I take leave of the kind reader, I wish to thank sincerely Mr. JOHN
MURRAY for the courtesy and the care he has displayed while this edition
was going through the press.

  HENRI CORDIER.
  PARIS, _1st of October, 1902_.


[1] Miss Yule has written the Memoir of her father and the new Dedication.

[2] Paragraphs which have been altered are marked thus +; my own additions
    are placed between brackets [ ].--H. C.


[Illustration:
  "Now strike your Sailes yee jolly Mariners,
  For we be come into a quiet Rode"....
      --THE FAERIE QUEENE, I. xii. 42.]




PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.

